Let's finish up by looking at two extended
examples.
The scenario for both examples is the control
system for the International Space Station,
which has to handle three recurring tasks:
supply ship guidance (SSG), gyroscope control
(G), and cabin pressure (CP).
For each device, the table shows us the time
between successive requests (the period),
the service time for each request, and the
service deadline for each request.
We'll first analyze the system assuming that
it's using a weak priority system.
First question: What is the maximum service
time for the cabin pressure task that still
allows all constraints to be met?
Well, the SSG task has a maximum allowable
latency of 20 ms, i.e., it's service routine
must start execution within 20 ms if it is
to meet its 25 ms deadline.
The G task has a maximum allowable latency
of 10 ms if it's to meet its deadline.
So no other handler can take longer than 10
ms to run or the G task will miss its deadline.
2.
Give a weak priority ordering that meets the
constraints.
Using the earliest deadline strategy discussed
earlier, the priority would be G with the
highest priority, SSG with the middle priority,
and CP with the lowest priority.
3.
What fraction of time will the processor spend
idle?
We need to compute the fraction of CPU cycles
needed to service the recurring requests for
each task.
SSG takes 5/30 = 16.67% of the CPU cycles.
G takes 10/40 = 25% of the CPU cycles.
And CP takes 10/100 = 10% of the CPU cycles.
So servicing the task requests takes 51.67%
of the cycles, leaving 48.33% of the cycles
unused.
So the astronauts will be able to play Minecraft
in their spare time :)
4.
What is the worst-case delay for each task
until completion of its service routine?
Each task might have to wait for the longest-running
lower-priority handler to complete plus the
service times of any other higher-priority
tasks plus, of course, its own service time.
SSG has the lowest priority, so it might have
to wait for CP and G to complete (a total
of 20 ms), then add its own service time (5
ms).
So it's worst-case completion time is 25 ms
after the request.
G might to wait for CP to complete (10 ms),
then add its own service time (10 ms) for
a worst-case completion time of 20 ms.
CP might have to wait for SSG to finish (5
ms), then wait for G to run (10 ms), then
add its own service time (10 ms) for a worst-case
completion time of 25 ms.
Let's redo the problem, this timing assuming
a strong priority system where, as before,
G has the highest priority, SSG the middle
priority, and CP the lowest priority.
What is the maximum service time for CP that
still allows all constraints to be met?
This calculation is different in a strong
priority system, since the service time of
CP is no longer constrained by the maximum
allowable latency of the higher-priority tasks
-
they'll simply preempt CP when they need to
run!
Instead we need to think about how much CPU
time will be used by the SSG and G tasks in
the 100 ms interval between the CP request
and its deadline.
In a 100 ms interval, there might be four
SSG requests (at times 0, 30, 60, and 90)
and three G requests (at times 0, 40, and
80).
Together these requests require a total of
50 ms to service.
So the service time for CP can be up 50 ms
and still meet the 100 ms deadline.
2.
What fraction of the time will the processor
spend idle?
Assuming a 50 ms service time for CP, it now
consumes 50% of the CPU.
The other request loads are as before, so
91.67% of the CPU cycles will be spent servicing
requests, leaving 8.33% of idle time.
3.
What is the worst-case completion time for
each task?
The G task has the highest priority, so its
service routine runs immediately after the
request is received and its worst-case completion
time is exactly its service time.
In the 25 ms interval between an SSG request
and its deadline, there might be at most one
G request that will preempt execution.
So the worst-case completion time is one G
service time (10 ms) plus the SSG service
time (5 ms).
Finally, from the calculation for problem
1, we chose the service time for the CP task
so that it will complete just at its deadline
of 100 ms,
taking into account the service time for multiple
higher-priority requests.
We covered a lot of ground in this lecture!
We saw that the computation needed for user-mode
programs to interact with external devices
was split into two parts.
On the device-side, the OS handles device
interrupts and performs the task of moving
data between kernel buffers and the device.
On the application side, user-mode programs
access the information via SVC calls to the
OS.
We worried about how to handle SVC requests
that needed to wait for an I/O event before
the request could be satisfied.
Ultimately we came up with a sleep/wakeup
mechanism that suspends execution of the process
until the some interrupt routine signals that
the needed information has arrived,
causing the sleeping process to marked as
active.
Then the SVC is retried the next time the
now active process is scheduled for execution.
We discussed hard real-time constraints with
their latencies, service times and deadlines.
Then we explored the implementation of interrupt
systems using both weak and strong priorities.
Real-life computer systems usually implement
strong priorities and support a modest number
of priority levels,
using a weak priority system to deal with
multiple devices assigned to the same strong
priority level.
This seems to work quite well in practice,
allowing the systems to meet the variety of
real-time constraints imposed by their I/O
devices.